# Upgrade v1.0.x-v22.11

This page describes the required steps to upgrade your Astarte cluster from `v1.0.x` to
`v22.11`. Your Astarte instance will **not** need to be upgraded.
The change in the versioning scheme of the Astarte Operator is meant to better keep up with
Kubernetes release cycle (see the [related issue](https://github.com/astarte-platform/astarte-kubernetes-operator/issues/306)
for more information).

Starting from the Astarte Operator `v22.11` release, the old `api.astarte-platform.org/v1alpha1`
APIs are deprecated and will be removed in the next release.
In the following, the upgrade path is described.

The upcoming sections will cover the following topics:
- upgrading the Astarte Operator,
- making sure that the Astarte, AstarteVoyagerIngress and Flow CR are stored using `v1alpha2` API version,
- upgrading the Astarte, AstarteVoyagerIngress and Flow CRDs to have only `v1alpha2` as storage version.

Before starting with the upgrade procedure it is strongly advised to [backup your Astarte
resources](095-advanced-operations.html#backup-your-astarte-resources).

## Upgrade Astarte Operator
The Astarte Operator upgrade procedure is handled by Helm. However, according to the Helm policies,
upgrading the CRDs must be handled manually.

The current section assumes that the Operator's chart landing version is `v22.11.00`. If a more recent
chart version is available, it is **your responsibility** referencing to the `v22.11.00` chart using
the `--version` flag when running `helm` commands.

To upgrade the Astarte CRDs, the following environment variables will be employed:

- `ASTARTE_OP_TEMPLATE_DIR` is the target directory in which the chart templates will be generated,
- `ASTARTE_OP_RELEASE_NAME` is the name of the Astarte Operator deployment,
- `ASTARTE_OP_RELEASE_NAMESPACE` is the namespace in which the Astarte Operator resides.

Please, make sure that the values you set for both the Operator's name and namespace match the
naming you already adopted when installing the Operator. A wrong naming can lead to a malfunctioning
Astarte cluster.

For standard deployments the following variables should be ok. However, it is your responsibility
checking that the values you set are consistent with your setup:

```bash
export ASTARTE_OP_TEMPLATE_DIR=/tmp
export ASTARTE_OP_RELEASE_NAME=astarte-operator
export ASTARTE_OP_RELEASE_NAMESPACE=astarte-operator
```

Update your local Helm charts:
```bash
$ helm repo update
```

Render the Helm templates with the following:
```bash
helm template $ASTARTE_OP_RELEASE_NAME astarte/astarte-operator \
    --namespace $ASTARTE_OP_RELEASE_NAMESPACE \
    --output-dir $ASTARTE_OP_TEMPLATE_DIR
```

After these steps you will find the updated CRDs within
`$ASTARTE_OP_TEMPLATE_DIR/$ASTARTE_OP_RELEASE_NAME/templates/crds.yaml`. Update the CRDs in your
cluster by replacing the CRDs yaml file:
```bash
kubectl replace -f $ASTARTE_OP_TEMPLATE_DIR/$ASTARTE_OP_RELEASE_NAME/templates/crds.yaml
```

The previous command has updated the CRDs for Astarte, AstarteVoyagerIngress and Flow.

Then, to upgrade the Operator use the dedicated `helm upgrade` command:
```bash
helm upgrade astarte-operator astarte/astarte-operator -n astarte-operator
```

The optional `--version` switch allows to specify the version to upgrade to - when not specified,
the latest version will be fetched and used. If you choose to upgrade to a specific version of the
chart by using the `--version` flag, please make sure to generate the updated CRDs template using
the same chart version.

By design, Astarte Operator's Helm charts cannot univocally be mapped to Operator's releases in a
one-to-one relationship. However each chart is tied to a specific Operator's version, which is user
configurable.

Therefore, upgrading a chart leads to an Operator's upgrade if and only if the Operator's tag
referenced by the chart is changed. You can check the Operator's tag bound to the chart simply
running:

```bash
helm show values astarte/astarte-operator
```

As usual, you can use the `--version` flag to point to a specific chart version.

## Make sure Astarte is stored using the `api.astarte-platform.org/v1alpha2` apiVersion

To do so, simply edit the Astarte resource in the cluster.  
Open the yaml file describing the Astarte resource with:
```bash
kubectl edit astarte -n astarte
```

Find the `apiVersion` field in the Astarte Spec section and change it (if needed) to `api.astarte-platform.org/v1alpha2`.

After having done this, you Astarte CR will look like this:
```yaml
apiVersion: api.astarte-platform.org/v1alpha2
kind: Astarte
...
spec:
  ...
status:
  ...
```

Once the yaml file is applied, the Operator will take over ensuring the reconciliation of your
Astarte instance. This will in turn change the version in which the Astarte CR is stored in
Kubernetes to `api.astarte-platform.org/v1alpha2`.


## Make sure Flow is stored using the `api.astarte-platform.org/v1alpha2` apiVersion

To do so, simply edit the Flow resource in the cluster.  
Open the yaml file describing the Flow resource with:
```bash
kubectl edit flow -n astarte
```

Find the `apiVersion` field in the Flow Spec section and change it (if needed) to `api.astarte-platform.org/v1alpha2`.

After having done this, your Flow CR will look like this:
```yaml
apiVersion: api.astarte-platform.org/v1alpha2
kind: Flow
...
spec:
  ...
status:
  ...
```

Once the yaml file is applied, the Operator will take over ensuring the reconciliation of your
Flow instance. This will in turn change the version in which the Flow CR is stored in
Kubernetes to `api.astarte-platform.org/v1alpha2`.

## Make sure AstarteVoyagerIngress is stored using the `api.astarte-platform.org/v1alpha2` apiVersion

**The AstarteVoyagerIngress is deprecated and will be removed starting from Astarte Operator v23.05.00.**
**Please consider [switching to the new AstarteDefaultIngress](066-migrate_to_astartedefaultingress.html).**

If you already have dropped the AstarteVoyagerIngress, you can skip this section.

To do so, simply edit the AstarteVoyagerIngress resource in the cluster.  
Open the yaml file describing the AstarteVoyagerIngress resource with:
```bash
kubectl edit avi -n astarte
```

Find the `apiVersion` field in the AstarteVoyagerIngress Spec section and change it (if needed) to `api.astarte-platform.org/v1alpha2`.

After having done this, your AstarteVoyagerIngress CR will look like this:
```yaml
apiVersion: api.astarte-platform.org/v1alpha2
kind: AstarteVoyagerIngress
...
spec:
  ...
status:
  ...
```

Once the yaml file is applied, the Operator will take over ensuring the reconciliation of your
AstarteVoyagerIngress instance. This will in turn change the version in which the AstarteVoyagerIngress
CR is stored in Kubernetes to `api.astarte-platform.org/v1alpha2`.

## Upgrade the CRDs to the new storage version
This step is handled by [`astartectl`](https://github.com/astarte-platform/astartectl). Ensure that `astartectl`
is installed on your machine and its version is at least `>= v22.11.00`.

Performing the actual upgrade is as simple as executing the following command:

```bash
$ astartectl cluster instances migrate storage-version
```

If an error occurs during the migration procedure, changes made by `migrate storage-version` will be reverted,
so that you can make sure of having performed all necessary steps described in this page before trying again.

### What happens under the hood?

When invoking the `migrate storage-version` command, `astartectl` interacts with your Astarte cluster and
retrieves the Astarte, Flow and AVI CRDs which are installed. Then, it checks that the CRDs are in a state
consistent with the migration step it needs to perform, i.e. that each one of them has both `v1alpha1`
and `v1alpha2` as `storedVersions`. For example, your Astarte CRD will look like this:

```yaml
name: astartes.api.astarte-platform.org
...
spec:
  ...
status:
  ...
  storedVersions:
  - v1alpha1
  - v1alpha2
```

Then, `astartectl` simply shrinks the `status.storedVersions` field to just `v1alpha2`.
After having run the command, your Astarte CRD will look like this:
```yaml
name: astartes.api.astarte-platform.org
...
spec:
  ...
status:
  ...
  storedVersions:
  - v1alpha2
```

If one of the previous tasks is not successful, the migration logic is reverted as not to leave
your cluster in a broken state.
